And now we're talking to Dr. Kevin Starr, and it's November 18, 99.
The 14th state librarian of California since 1850.
Really?
Now, does every state have a state librarian?
Every state has a state librarian, but few states have a state library of the size and scope of the California State Library.
The California State Library is now budgeted at $113 million a year in all its programs.
More than $70 million of that is money the library administers for public libraries and other library programs in the field.
If we pass the bond issue that's now before the voters in March, that will authorize the expenditure of $350 million for library construction throughout the state.
It will be the single largest, as far as I can tell, bond issue, the single largest amount of money ever authorized at one time for the construction of libraries in the history of this republic.
Mr. The Nation.
Are these all public libraries?
These will be public libraries and school libraries.
Okay.
So that really is your purview, public libraries and school libraries.
Well, no, because we also have the Library of California.
The Library of California is operated by the State Library.
It's authorized by a special bill signed by the governor, which authorizes the 8,000 public and private libraries in the state.
under the guidance of the state library to form a resource sharing network that cuts across multi-types, that cuts across public libraries, private libraries, government libraries, special libraries, law libraries, corporate libraries.
It will be astonishing.
It'll take about 10 to 15 years or 10 years to pull this program together.
So this is just an assumption right now?
We just started.
There's a second year of it now.
Are you going to have a facility or is it more of a conceptual thing?
Conceptually, in today's world, you don't need a facility.
You just need super servers.
We have eight planning districts throughout the state, which will eventually become eight regions for this Library of California.
But they're cooperative.
This is not a new governmental entity.
It's a government program.
It's a program which the state of California, the state library will be conducting.
So is it more of a clearinghouse kind of a function?
It's a resource sharing network.
The day will come when one person, by entering any one of the 8,000 libraries in the state, is basically entering every library.
And there'll be union catalogs, there'll be, of course, the sharing of digital information,
And even, even, and that's the longer, more expensive aspect of it, the sharing of hard copy, which is to say you can walk into a library in Sacramento and search out a title of the search engine will determine that that book is only available in the University of California at San Diego, and that book will get to you.
Yeah.
So somebody with a public library card can borrow a book from Berkeley?
This is the pioneering dimension of it and which takes the most
sophisticated negotiation is to make sure that the university libraries play in this field, that they're not panicked, that suddenly 85 people will want a copy of the movie Dick because a high school in Chico is assigning that.
So we work out protocols, et cetera, and those protocols can be brought into the actual programs, the computer programs that will be evolving.
to make sure that we don't have these abuses.
Well, would you believe that Holy Cross just emailed me, and the only copy that they can find of Jesse Scherer's book on the Foundation of Public Libraries is the Harvard copy.
See, that's a very typical, but that's an example of that.
Now, does that mean that you have to go to... No, Holy Cross is bringing it in from... In fact, they're using...
Yeah, the email says, Nick, it's here.
Come get it, you know.
Yeah, which is wonderful.
Sure.
Well, what we're doing is that.
Of course, we already do that in California.
We do it among public libraries and we do it among academic libraries.
But the idea of creating a multi-type library of California is a little more sophisticated.
Well, as I say, that's why.
Give us a decade to really make it work.
And this is your baby, basically.
I am a state librarian.
We got the legislation through, and the California Library Association played a major role in lobbying this through.
But it's my baby as a state librarian to develop it over the next number of years, and I'm already busy doing that.
Well, you are not only a historian, but a historian of some note, and I'm looking at a couple of your books as we speak, you know.
Well, thank you for saying that.
I've been embarked upon a multi-volume social and cultural history of California, and I'm now catching up on my current volume, which is the sixth in the series, will take me to 1911.
Well, I found what you had written on Jake Zeitlin most useful.
Oh, I love Jake.
Well, Jake, in the case of Jake, that whole circle around his bookstore at the side of the grasshopper and later the big red barn there, that whole circle was in effect the Bohemia.
the literary intelligentsia of Los Angeles in the 1920s and somewhat into the 1930s.
By the mid to late 30s, of course, you have a tremendous writer and bohemian group centered in and around the motion picture studios.
Yeah.
I'm doing a chapter.
I'm developing a chapter on this idea of this scholar bookseller.
And, of course, Jake's in there, and Raden is in there, you know, Warren Howell, I guess.
Warren Howell is a very good friend of mine.
And Jake was a good friend of mine.
I was perverse to know them each.
Warren, based out of San Francisco, of course, there at the corner of Post and Powell.
Well, I'm really very interested in all of it.
All of the material that you've written on the book culture in California.
But I guess the... Well, feel free to borrow freely.
Well, I cite everything, so... Well, you certainly cite everything.
But, you know, we all belong to a community of interpretation.
That's right.
And no one person can interpret everything.
And I try to cite meticulously myself, but I'm very proud.
People use my materials.
Well, that's why we do it.
Actually, Jake has a darn good oral history at UCLA, which I have, and Larry Powell's got a great oral history.
I have copies of both of them.
I have them both here, too.
I didn't really get to use them in the first book.
I'm hoping to use them.
I am a scholar.
I'm also a university professor.
I hold the rank of university professor at USC.
I'm one of eight people on the faculty of 2000 to hold
And I'm also a contributing editor, as you just found out, to the Los Angeles Times.
Although as a state official, I take no money from the newspapers.
It's prohibited by law.
Well, I have to say I have my own personal LexisNexis account, which is not inexpensive, but it's really been essential for this book.
And just doing a search of Kevin Starr, I know who you write for.
I mean, you have voluminous entries out there.
You're really very well represented in the L.A.
Times and any number of other...
But all these things feed into my professional mind.
And this is what I'm driving at here, right, exactly.
And I think that, just as we were saying earlier, I think the idea that librarians must remain productive intellectuals in part of our cadre, or we're going to lose the profession, just as we must remain skilled technologists.
in part of our cadre or we'll lose the profession.
And we must remain skilled public administrators or we'll lose the profession.
We'll lose the profession in one case to scholars, in the other case we'll lose it to technologists, in the other case we'll lose it to skilled public administrators who are not librarians.
Because librarianship as a subject, of course, the core of it is bibliography.
including digital bibliography and search, the navigation of knowledge, classification and navigation of knowledge.
But surrounding librarianship are multiple skills, in administration, in public relations, and must, to repeat myself, it must be connected also with the life of the mind.
I think so.
It cannot just be, you know, the old lyric of...
of uh of books unlearned men assume the care as eunuchs are made guardians of the fair must not be applicable to us so i um i'm very proud to be a librarian i always name it as my first as my profession really and this this isn't exactly a profession that you chose i mean this was not where this was not your career track i mean you were it was my career track you know we all
What the Beatles say, you can't always get what you want.
Not the Beatles, the Rolling Stones.
Rolling Stones, right.
Yeah, you can't always get what you want, but if you try real hard, you get what you need.
When I was doing my doctorate at Harvard, I was very good friends with Gordon Buchanan and Ted Alavisos.
of the Harvard Library.
Gordon was director.
They each were sort of up at the deputy university librarian level.
And I socialized and partied with the librarians and was thinking of getting a library degree on the side at Simmons.
Which is a pretty good program, actually.
Yes, it is.
But then I went out on leave in San Francisco, and the mayor made me librarian of the city.
That's amazing.
I read about that in Wiley's book.
I didn't realize that.
Wiley was sort of ambivalent to me in that book.
Kind of ambivalent to me.
I don't know why, but anyway.
I can guess.
And I would like to talk about San Francisco at some point, too, because I have to say I did...
I spent about ten days out there, two years ago, really, trying to nail down that whole story.
Well, I'd be happy to do that.
And, of course, I do have the POE, which is, and you must have some thoughts on the POE, which came out in July, too.
Oh, good for you.
God, what a research you are.
Absolutely.
We'll go into that.
It's a separate topic.
Okay, but I really, I have to say, you know, when we talk about...
I've got the great letter by Jurist Frankfurter to FDR, you know, supporting the nomination of Archibald McQueach.
And, you know, he said librarianship, he said not to put it down, but this is something you can learn kind of on the job.
What we need is a person who loves books, knows, loves books, knows books.
And as a humanist, I'm paraphrasing him very badly here, but... Well, that's a challenge to our profession, so I agree with the justice.
Now, when I was made acting librarian at the city, I went and got a library degree at Berkeley, and I loved it.
I got my Master of Library Science degree while being acting, and as soon as I finished the degree, they made my acting to city librarian.
Yeah, well, they made it almost conditional, didn't they, for you to get the job?
The mayor didn't make it conditional, but it...
I made it conditional and the commission wanted it.
Well, it sort of more or less resolved the problems with the union, I guess, so to speak.
Right, right.
And I don't blame them.
I don't blame them at all for having somebody being made a librarian of a great city without a degree.
The fact that I was a productive scholar, the fact that I love books...
It still did not compensate for the fact I didn't have my union card, which I was proud to get.
Let me tell you, I loved the library school at Berkeley.
And if you want to talk about the way that that school has been hijacked from librarianship, we can get back to that.
Yeah, well, we do.
I would because I want to ask your thoughts not only about that, but Columbia scuttling their program, Chicago scuttling their program.
That's great.
Well, but anyway, so then I served as librarian of San Francisco.
Two years, right?
74 to 76, I think.
No, no, no, no.
73, all through 73, 74, 75, into 76.
Yeah, so Wiley's got the dates wrong, I think.
Well, whatever.
Maybe I got them wrong now.
Well, that's all.
I'll check them.
All right.
He didn't give me credit for the acting time, I think, whereas I always considered it a continuity.
And, of course, at that time, I advanced plans for the restoration of the existing building.
I advanced plans that would take about 37% of our space on the Hyde Street side that was literally dirt earth and develop that with closed shelving, finish off the wing on the, not the Larkin, but the
Yeah, the far, what is it, Hyde Street side, right, the Hyde Street side, on the back, finish off that wing, which there was no wing, sink a great kind of geodesic dome in the center because we no longer needed the light well because of late or early 20th century lighting requirements.
And I thought that for about $18 to $20 million, I could recycle that building for a couple hundred years.
I brought that idea to the library board, and they said it was unworthy.
They wanted this new building.
How do you feel in retrospect?
I was right.
On the other hand, I was right, although I'm thrilled that the building will be recycled as the Asian Art Museum.
I'm thrilled that the building is still going to stay alive.
I was right because basically the building they built is almost, is not almost, but it's a reverse paradigm.
of what a great public library should be because it's a building that got mongered by notions.
You know the phrase notion mongering?
It got mongered by the architectural notions of that great light well that sweeps up the center of it.
It makes it so impossible to store books, etc.
It got mongered by the notion that the public library should be a sort of mall for computers.
Well, you're anticipating all my questions.
I didn't have to ask you questions here.
All for computers rather than a great public library.
It also lost sight of the fact that the San Francisco Public Library, despite its difficulties and underfunding, was a distinguished collection.
It was?
You put that in the past tense.
Well, because the very act of going into that new building meant that they had to deaccession about a half a million books.
And as we know in librarianship, you never move and deaccession at the same time.
Because that winds up into just bulk dumping.
Shouldn't Mr. Dallin have appreciated that, do you think?
He should have.
Shouldn't he have?
Every title on your shelf has a constituency.
There's only one way to deaccession a book, and that's title by title by title.
Now, let me just interrupt for a second.
When I interviewed Ken Dowell and I interviewed everybody out there, and what I find, you know, particularly, I'm going to try and find the right adjective, but what upsets me most of all is that they didn't even keep a record of the books that they got rid of.
No.
I mean, it's like sending people off to a concentration camp and not even writing down their names, at least.
Your first name is Nicholas.
Nick.
Nick is fine.
Yeah, Nicholas.
I wish you would.
Yeah.
The reason, Nick, they didn't do this is because they were not going through the process of professional deaccession, where you take each book and you look up its records.
And you examine and say, what is the constituency of this book in terms of its circulation?
But more importantly, what is the constituency of this book in the architecture of academic knowledge?
And if I have a book on deacons in the early church, and that book hasn't circulated for 15 years, I keep it on the shelves because some college student writing a course, writing a paper on early church history, might need it six years from now.
This is a theme, by the way, that I have.
I open my new book with, I know I don't want to waste all the time, but I open in the Boston Athenaeum when I was tying up Gentle Madness.
And I was desperate to find the catalog to an edition of the Peeps catalog from 19, whatever it was.
I find it at the Athenaeum.
I hadn't been able to find it at Harvard or any place else.
And I'm checking it out.
And I'm the first person to take it out in 81 years.
Well, that's okay.
Well, anyway, I say this is a true story, and I use it, and this is how I conclude.
Right, well, I gave you an example of 13 years.
Right, and so I say... Well, when they went and said, we will build a building in which we become enamored of a mall, in which the architect, who's enamored of architecture, takes away a significant percentage of our space with a light well going nowhere and doing nothing,
except showing forth the glories of his architecture.
And then we must move into a new building, and somehow in the process of that, and moving a library, incidentally, is one of the great heroic efforts.
We at the State Library, two years ago, moved 27 miles of books as we refit our old building with a $22 million seismic retrofit.
But when you do that and say at the same time, we're going to get rid of a half a million books, you have a formula for catastrophe.
And they try to do it so nobody would know about it, which is even worse.
Of course.
Of course, because do you think the taxpayer, the buying public, do you think anybody would cooperate with the dismantlement of a collection which has been developed in one way or another since 1906 and even before 1906 because retroactive buying, et cetera, of titles, et cetera, a distinguished collection?
For instance, I researched good parts of my Americans in the California Dream series at the San Francisco Public.
and found superb collections in, say, show business, the history of Hollywood, spectacular collections in the California novel fiction.
Now, some of these novels no one's read for 50 years, but if they're important novels, they should, in terms of chronicling the social life of California, they should be kept on the shelves.
It was just astonishing.
Astonishing what was it.
But let me tell you now what both Ken Dallin and Gina Minudri told me.
And I asked them, do you feel that the San Francisco Public Library serves a function as a research level library?
And they both said no.
They both said no.
And, you know, I asked Bernie Margolis, you know, I said, what do you think of that?
You know, of course, BPL is an ARL library.
So, I mean, we know how they stand.
Well, that means that they took San Francisco then out of the league of the Los Angeles Public Library, which is a great research library.
San Francisco out of the league of the Boston Public Library and certainly out of the league of the New York Public Library and the Free Library of Philadelphia.
And they disestablished a library that was a distinguished collection.
And they both said, in different words, well, we've got Berkeley here, we've got Stanford here.
If a person wants to do research at that level,
You know, we have these other resources here.
Well, is there a mandate?
Did they have a mandate for the voters to do that?
I don't believe so.
But then at the same time, they also dismantled these departments.
You know, I mean, the departments for books, for literature, for the humanities, they made one big department.
You know, I mean, I talked to... You know, I'm probably being indiscreet talking to you because as a state official, I should be above the fray.
Well, I have to say also that... But I also am a librarian, and the things that we're talking about, we're not in the business of disestablishment.
They disestablished a distinguished collection, didn't they?
They did.
And you kept your counsel, I have to say.
I saw people tape you on TV, and I saw you when the library was opening.
I mean, you really didn't store the pot or anything like that.
Well, because we have a tradition in California that state officials, besides, Nick, it was done.
It has been done.
It's only this recent report, for instance, that's come out that's actually corroborated fully with people like Gray Brecken and Nick Baker, etc., have been pointing out for some time.
To say that, for instance, to say that the library, the largest public library at the center, at ground zero,
of the fourth largest urban population mass in the nation, possessed of a collection that is basically moving towards 100 years old, should disestablish that collection without any mandate, public discussion, etc.
It's rather shocking, isn't it?
You said earlier about a half a million books, so actually it was worse than they even acknowledged, wasn't it?
What do they say?
Baker and others alleged as many as 200,000.
Okay.
Well, I mean, I don't know.
The reason I'm saying that is that they have another couple hundred thousand sitting in storage down in Brooksville.
Actually, they have like a million down in Brooksville.
Okay.
That they're trying to give away, okay?
Exactly.
You use the numbers that you think.
What numbers do you think that they have?
And you talk about the day that library opened.
It was supposed to be good at least until 2020.
The shelves were full.
I mean, what kind of planning is that?
There's a million books in storage, and I know they're actively trying to give away about 100,000.
I think your numbers are fine, actually.
We won't know any records, do we?
We don't have any records.
And I've been down to Brooks Hall, and that's another thing.
You know, you say it is wonderful that the Old Main is going to be the Asian Arts Center, but wouldn't it have been nice if they had kept that?
Like, you know, the BPL builds the Johnson Building, but we certainly keep the McKim Building next door.
But you see, that's what my plan would have done.
Now, you've seen that building.
You know the side there.
That's right.
The side that faces the new library.
Underneath that was all just earth.
It was uncomplete, that bottom side.
I would have dug out a couple floors there and put closed compact shelving.
And I would have handled any number of volumes for years to come.
I would have taken and built another wing in the back, which was incomplete because they ran out of money in 1917.
And then I would have sunk this great dome in the center.
And in sinking the dome in the center, I could have had a kind of festival quality, which is a good thing to have in a library.
You know, I don't mean to get you into a, to try and draw you into an exchange between Dowell and any of these others.
No, I'm not going to answer that.
That's my opinion.
Yeah, that's right.
But what I am, Dowell does say that he was brought to San Francisco.
I mean, he says a point blank to build that library.
He believes that's why Mayor Feinstein...
recommended that he be hired, and he said, there's no doubt in my mind that I was brought here to build this library.
And then, of course, he'd written that book, The Electronic Library, and I guess he'd done a similar kind of thing out in Colorado Springs.
I've talked to people, by the way, that followed him out in Colorado Springs, so I do have a sense of how his vision was put in place in another assignment.
But I'm just wondering, do you believe that he was, in fact, brought in to build a library, more specifically this library, this library of the future?
that he went ahead and created.
In other words, you're asking me as to whether or not the elite, the political elite, including Mayor Feinstein and the friends of the library, told him to establish that collection.
No, no, I'm not even suggesting that.
No, no.
The library that he built.
I mean, do you think they had in mind this 21st century electronic library?
Do you think that's what it is?
No, I think that's what his vision was, though.
What do you think it's become?
Well, I think maybe that's a question for you, not me.
I'm just a journalist.
I'm curious what you think.
It's kind of a mall, isn't it?
There's a search for a metaphor.
It's sort of a mall that you walk around.
You know how kids used to walk around shopping center malls or teenagers?
Well, the first time I went in and I had my little tape recorder with me, I said, it is, you know, it's attractive.
And I played the tape recorder because I really wanted to pick up the acoustics.
I mean, this is not a place where you go to read.
I mean, a string quartet would perform beautifully in there.
It's a kind of entertainment center.
It is.
And I do believe they had that in mind.
Well, then they succeeded.
And they succeeded.
I cannot answer the question as to whether or not the mayor or the...
Friends of the Library or the Library Commission specifically instructed him to do this.
I was not privy to that.
Yeah, and I don't even think I wanted to, I don't even think I was asking to go that far.
No, I don't know.
Well, let me ask this.
Were you asked for any input?
None whatsoever, because I was on record.
as favoring the restoration of what I've already outlined.
And in fact, in coming up against such resistance was one of the factors that determined, that encouraged me to resign my job, even though Mayor Aliotto wanted me to stay on, and Mayor Moscone, who was later assassinated, had specifically
asked me to stay on. What do you think to jump around a little bit what do you think of this concept of the of the affinity rooms, that's you know these these rooms that they've built over there, which are pretty, again they're handsome, they're attractive, but none of them are really building collections. Now that now San Francisco should have a great gay lesbian collection it certainly should it should have and all those of these
These theme rooms, et cetera, are wonderful, provided that they're tied to collections.
And I don't think they are.
If they're just public meeting rooms, then they could be had in less expensive spaces.
But they should be tied to the purposes of the library, to scholarship, to archival research, et cetera.
And to build collections.
I know that Regina Menudry does not have any of that going yet.
In fact, at one point, we were negotiating about possibly getting a hold of the Veterans Building across the city hall for the Sutro Library.
At that point, Regina said to me, well, gee, if I got that, could she have some room to build her gay and lesbian collection?
meaning she was looking for a room already.
Yeah, amazing.
I'm not against those theme rooms because San Francisco is a multicultural, multi... San Francisco is a city of great tolerance and inclusiveness.
But if you're going to do it in the library,
you should do it in a library way.
If you're going to do it in a museum, there should be paintings attached.
If you're going to do it in a library, there should be books, manuscripts, archives attached.
And that was my problem.
I had a long interview with Coulter, and I said, you know, great, congratulations, you raised $30 million, and you, and, and,
You know, I mean, Paul LeClaire told me, this was two years ago, so he said, do you realize I have to raise $500,000 a week?
I mean, he said, that's what it takes me to run the New York Public Library.
And they do very well.
You know, if you're raising money in San Francisco, congratulations, you're doing a good job.
I certainly would never be critical of that.
But wouldn't it be a good idea to use some of those resources to build collections?
And that's why I asked about... They can't do that now.
There's no room for the collections.
There's no room for the collections, number one.
And I don't think that... And Coulter did say, by the way, he said, you know, when they went on their tour, he walked into the Schomburg Library in Harlem, which is one of the great libraries.
And he said, this is it.
What I would like to establish in San Francisco is a Gay Schomburg Library.
What a great idea.
But he didn't do that.
He didn't.
That'd be fine.
And you have traditions of scholarship like Randy Schultz.
Exactly.
You have traditions of writers.
Armistead, Mopon.
You've got...
that book on coming out during World War II.
Right.
You've got a lot of writers and collecting in this area.
And for instance, the Ginsburg collection, that went to Stanford.
Now that cost a million dollars.
That was a lot of money.
But that's the kind of thing that could have been, you know, I think they could have gotten for San Francisco.
Well, see, that's the things that a mall, an entertainment mall, the library as entertainment mall can't do these things you're talking about.
That's part of the classic.
You have to have a classic library.
You have to have space.
You have to have collection development space.
You have to be oriented towards that kind of material the way that Stanford is under Mike Keller.
Because Stanford Library is not an entertainment mall.
It's a library.
That's right.
And I think that Ken Dallin...
He basically told you his motivation.
I don't want to get in a fight with him or question his motives.
He told you his motivation.
If you want to do that, you're supposed to go to Stanford or Cal.
That's right.
If you want to do that kind of work.
I have him quoted on that, and you don't even have to respond to it.
No, it must be the same way of saying that if you wanted to write a book in Boston, go over to Harvard.
You don't go to the Boston Public Library.
Or worse to worse, if you want to write a book in New York, go down to NYU.
Don't go to 42nd Street.
Right.
Or Columbia or whatever.
Exactly.
We're covering all these things.
By the way, let me know when you have to run.
No, no.
I'll stay as long as you want.
Now, I'm also very, and I think to balance off, and I'm really very, I love libraries.
In fact, with this book, my wife and I travel the world to go to the great libraries through history.
And I certainly am using as counterbalance to this.
Look at the L.A.
situation, that horrible fire.
They took, what, seven years to build a new library?
Well, look what they built.
That's right.
And they've kept the academic, the research integrity of the Los Angeles Public Library there.
First of all, they did a little ceremonial space with those escalators, but that's fine.
Because on all the floors are great collections.
which were lovingly put many of them in freeze-dried cellars and brought back through rather technology, which I don't fully understand.
But it's a proud member of the urban research libraries group, etc.
I quote the Larry Powell piece in the L.A.
Times, and he said, as much as I mourn the loss of the building, he said, but I really mourn.
is the loss of the books, of the collections.
He said, because it's the collections that matter.
And that does more or less put it... But they didn't do violence to the identity.
These things, as much as was lost, the identity of the library was not lost.
Where San Francisco Public Library has a new identity now.
It's a new kind of thing.
You know, they maintain that the library in San Francisco has never enjoyed the kind of status as the opera and the symphony and the art museum.
Whereas here in Boston, you know, the BPL is like the Boston Symphony and the Red Sox.
But, you know, that's like the major in Vietnam who said we had to destroy the village.
To save it.
Right.
Certainly the library was building through its friends in San Francisco a very growing cadre of people who were interested.
And after all, it takes a couple hundred years to build a great city.
Boston has been around since the 1630s and is the academic center of the United States.
The fact that this frontier city of San Francisco should have reached the point where it had that distinguished building and that distinguished collection.
which can be seen from another point of view as a tremendous achievement.
And, you know, by the logic of Dallin and Gina Minudri that we already have sufficient research collections around here, you know, by that logic, then the BPL doesn't have to be a research library because we've got Harvard and we've got, you know, every other collection, 50 universities in the area.
They should turn the BPL into an entertainment movement.
Of course, don't try and do that.
Try and do that.
So it's...
Basically, Nicholas, this shows something about San Francisco.
San Francisco was mesmerized by all this talk of electronic this and that.
San Francisco was lulled into this.
People were asleep at the switch.
The establishment of the city was asleep at the switch.
in a way that the establishment of Los Angeles was not, and that the establishment of Boston and New York and Baltimore.
Talk about Baltimore.
There's an embattled city with a lot of problems, but they're proud of their library.
Oh, and it's a wonderful library.
It certainly is.
Do you see a cautionary tale from all this?
A cautionary tale is when they promise the 76 trombones, you know, when they promise... Well, no, I don't want to say that.
I don't want to tack down.
But the cautionary tale is that
is that the whole San Francisco experience should be used as a reverse paradigm of library development.
Oh, that's great.
You know how you can see a sentence shaped and you can see it in type?
That's a great sentence right there.
Reverse paradigm.
Yeah, that's really wonderful.
And then did you want to comment at all on the post-occupancy evaluation?
I think it pretty much speaks for itself.
Yes, it speaks for itself.
And, of course, it corroborates what many people like Nicholas Baker, who came under enormous personal criticism,
They were jamming him.
I've got everything that they called him.
You know, and then Coulter, and again, I don't want you to get into a, you don't have to because I've got him saying it.
You know, calling those librarians, you know, a bunch of frustrated middle-aged white women, you know.
Isn't that appalling?
Isn't that appalling to come from an official?
You can quote me on this.
What an appalling statement to come from an official of a city that prides itself on its tolerance of all varieties of the human condition.
And that was to dismiss them, by the way.
That was a sexist remark.
It really is.
It was intolerable at the state level.
I mean, and...
And beyond that, I asked Dallin flat out, I said, you know, there's a comment that's attributed to you.
Did you actually say, after the 1989 earthquake,
Now we have a great opportunity to clean out the Augean stables to compare books basically to horseshit, you know.
And he said, well, this is the answer.
He said, well, that quote wasn't original with me.
I said, well, of course it's not.
I mean, it goes back to classical times.
But no, he said it was first used years ago by a San Francisco columnist.
I said, but did you use it?
And he did.
He confirmed that he used it.
Yeah.
Well, there you go.
I mean, if this is the attitude that a librarian has about books, that they are to be clear.
And I go back and I tell you this Herculean task.
He cleans out in one day these stables that have never been cleaned out.
He's telling the story beautifully by putting all this together.
I wrote that quote from him.
And he confirmed it.
Well, I'd heard it around town.
The librarians had been telling me.
And it was the first question I had for him.
I forget if he throws me out, that's the one I want to have his answer to.
He threw me out of it.
He didn't.
We talked for about an hour, hour and a half.
Anyway, it's going to be a good chapter.
And I start this chapter, by the way, in Boston with the flood, you know, last summer.
And I arrive, I'm there, and here you have these librarians.
They have grief counselors coming in there because they're desperate to save their collections.
They have eight million books, but they're trying to save every one.
And can you imagine the trauma that the San Francisco librarians felt as they saw their life work?
Yeah, well, I found two pages, by the way, who witnessed it.
And I have this young woman actually crying as she tells me what she saw.
And then she goes up to Kathy Page and says, will you please make them stop?
And she says, I'm sure your supervisor has other more important things for you to worry about.
And there you have it, you know.
It was a frenzy.
You know, there may be, Nicholas, some kind of, not only is it a reverse paradigm, there may be some kind of bizarre...
repudiation of self.
Oh, this is great.
That's involved here that possibly, you know, who was the man, the
The sociologist down at UC San Diego, he was a wonderful, from the Frankfurt School.
Oh, boy, I don't know.
You know the one I'm talking about.
Yeah, I do, I do.
He was very big in the 60s.
He said to me, he said that the middle classes, the upper middle class, he said, it was always interesting because it contained within itself the spirit of its own contradictions.
At any one moment, it could completely repudiate what it was.
Well, Somerset Maugham was fascinated by that in the Moon and Sixth Band, the Gauguin story.
And I think that maybe there's some kind of pathology was involved in the San Francisco situation, a kind of shared collective pathology in which certain librarians, not all, but just certain librarians,
basically repudiated themselves, repudiated their profession, repudiated their work in a kind of almost demonic, an almost, what's the word I want, where you're possessed.
Demonic is pretty good.
So that the throwing out of the books assumed a kind of quality of obscene ritual.
Wow.
Yeah.
I don't know that, but it's a speculation.
So I like to end on hopeful notes.
Well, the end on hopeful notes is that no one else is doing what they did.
Do you see a way out for them with this POE and with maybe rechanneling more space in this building?
How could they do that?
Yeah, how can they?
How can they walk that building?
I don't know how.
The books were not... They were not... It was not a building built for books.
It was not a building built for books.
Now, did you ever see the video they made called The Future Library back in 1988?
No.
Oh, I have it, and I opened this, my piece.
I just described the video, and I asked Alan, did you make this?
And he said he did.
It was funded.
It had money from Pacific Bell.
It also had money from the Department of Education.
Pacific Bell, of course, Coulter was a... That's right.
No, I got all this.
No, I've covered it.
But then I just walk you through this movie.
And I describe it.
And it's a robotic woman.
It's a cyborg who leads you around the library.
The word books, it's a 12-minute video, is only...
When I first came in to the State Library, to become State Librarian in 1994, I served on a task force at San Jose State.
We're trying to write a mission about library education.
The word book wasn't used once in any of the other alternative write-ups.
We have passed that point.
Five to six years later, already the San Francisco Public Library looks like a naive mistake that we've left behind in the profession.
We have reintegrated psychologically the
the book with the most elaborate forms of electronic communication.
Oh, that's wonderful.
I asked Bill Holman what he thought, and he said, if you want to ruin a library, hire an architect.
That's a very good point.
Two people would not talk to me, by the way.
Kathy, whatever her name is, Simon, the architect, needless to say she was defending a lawsuit at that time.
And I was surprised that Marjorie Stern didn't want to talk to me.
But then again... Of course not.
She had Marjorie Stern.
Don't quote me about her.
No, no.
No, no, no.
You don't have to, by the way.
But she must feel terrible about this whole thing.
I think so.
She was very gracious to me.
She said, Mr. Bazbaines, I wish you well on what you're doing, but I think I don't want to talk to you.
And I said, Mr. Stern, I don't blame you, actually.
Because you put her whole soul in this thing.
Yep.
I must have broken her up.
Absolutely.
I will never say anything against her.
She's a fine man.
Oh, no, she's not really.
And, you know, I give Dowling his day.
I mean, I interview him.
I give Coulter his day.
I quote him.
This is going to be a great chapter, I have to say.
I'm excited.
And having had this conversation with you, I would have been totally remiss.
I haven't gone ahead and not had these observations of yours.
Now, would you like to talk a little bit about the state library?
Yeah, sure.
All right, because you asked the first question, do other states have libraries like this?
The answer is no, with the exception of a few states, but no library, the California State Library, in terms of its budget and its holdings.
Now, New York State, I understand that they are actually an ARL library, so they must have a pretty good library in New York.
Absolutely.
I'm going to say that.
It's in a league.
California State Library is in a league with New York, I think with Virginia, Pennsylvania, Illinois.
Um...
Now, we here in Massachusetts probably don't need such a thing.
I mean, we have wonderful libraries up and down.
Don't forget the California State Library functioned as the single comprehensive library in the state until the rise of the university and public libraries in the turn of the century.
So that's why we have in public possession the Audubon Double Elephant Folio, the Nuremberg Chronicle.
That's why we have all those things.
Dad, did you do that for me again?
That's very important to me.
Why do you have a Nuremberg Chronicle and an elephant folio?
The Audubon double elephant folio.
Yeah, but I know what that is, but how is it that you have one?
The reason we have those treasures is that we were the single comprehensive library in the state until the rise of the public and university libraries after 1900.
In other words, for about 50 years, the major library in California was the California State Library.
And you were collecting rare things.
People to Europe in the 1860s to buy.
We bought in classics.
We bought in the literature.
We bought in the fine arts.
Is there a dominant figure who stands out in that period that you can think of offhand?
Which of my predecessors, no.
Yeah, that is pretty... No, but if you...
You call the California State Library and talk to Gary Kurutz, K-U-R-U-T-Z.
Okay.
He is our librarian, Special Collections, and he is now preparing a beautiful catalog for us called Treasures of the California State Library.
Oh, good.
I'll call him.
Call him, and he will give you the names of those librarians who traveled on our behalf in the 1860s, 70s.
Okay, yeah.
And because this great frontier state wanted to, and I did a preface to...
I did a preface to this catalog in which I said that this great frontier state wanted to serve its local instrumental needs, but also wanted to invoke the world as the library can invoke the Plenum Mundi.
When are they going to publish this catalog?
It's going to be published in January.
I'll cite it.
That's why I'm asking.
I'll be happy to cite it in my bibliography.
No, but wait.
He can send you a copy of it.
in manuscript.
I guarantee you it'll get into my book.
Will you call him?
Yeah, sure.
Gary K-U-R.
K-U-R-U-T-Z.
U-T-Z.
I'll have to just call your office up in Sacramento.
Call my office.
Have him transfer over to Gary Kurutz.
Tell him you've talked to me.
I'm in Los Angeles now.
Okay.
And tell him to give a talk.
And tell him to send you the manuscript instead of for your citation.
Yep.
And it will be used.
My preface.
Tell him to send you my preface.
Absolutely.
This is terrific.
I think we've covered the high points.
You are a thorough researcher.
That's just one.
I don't mean to be patronizing.
I love to see somebody just soak up the stuff.
Well, I have to say this book's taken five years, and it probably should have been done three years ago.
Isn't it fun?
It's the greatest thing, you know, and I'm changing publishers.
The San Francisco Public Library will be very contentious, and I think the idea of what have we learned from it
And that's where my reverse paradigm comes in.
We've learned what to avoid.
It's terrific.
I've really devoted a lot more words to it than I probably should, but my new publisher says, write as many words as you want.
You booked it well, I hope, your first book.
It's still in print and hardcover.
It's got 60,000 copies in print, and HarperCollins is going to do the new book.
I'm leaving Holt for a variety of reasons.
I'm really excited about the new book.
That's great.
And I really love your stuff.
I'm looking at your book right now.
And I think maybe if you want... Material dreams.
Yes, if you want to mention the fact that about the profession of librarianship, I'd like to go into this for just a second.
Yes, very important.
We must maintain these substantive relationships to our field.
Say, for instance, if we ever want to get the librarianship of Congress back...
We've got to develop scholar librarians that can attract the attention of the president of the United States.
Now, what do you mean?
If we want to get the library, I mean, do you think it's a good idea or do you think that maybe having a scholar like that?
Now, wait, what if we had first rate scholars who are also librarians?
like Borges down in Argentina, for instance, or wherever.
Our father Boyle, Leonard Boyle, at the Vatican is a perfect example.
Now, then don't quote it that way if we want to get it back.
But if we want to be considered...
If the library profession wants to be considered for the directorship of distinguished libraries, then it must produce scholar librarians.
I'll stay with that quote.
That's terrific.
Because I am, the scholar librarian is of particular interest.